Make auth system more flexible & convenient and add "callbacks" (#1032)
elan-ev/tobira: docs/docs/setup/auth/user/callback.md

> ---

Reviewer: I commented on this in another doc, but it happened multiple times here, too, so I'm not sure it's intended, and will just add a global note like this.

Should 

> shibauthorizer

be

> `shibautorizer`

?

> auth.source = "callback:http://localhost:9090/"
> ```

## How it works

In this mode, your custom auth logic sits behind Tobira and is called for every incoming request that needs authentication:

```
┌──────┐                    ┌─────────┐                    ┌────────┐  request headers   ┌────────┐
│      │ -----------------> │ reverse │ -----------------> │        │ -----------------> │  Your  │
│ User │                    │  proxy  │                    │ Tobira │                    │  Auth  │
│      │ <----------------- │         │ <----------------- │        │ <----------------- │  Logic │
└──────┘                    └─────────┘                    └────────┘   auth/user info   └────────┘
```

Your callback needs to be an HTTP endpoint that you specify behind the colon of `callback:`.
The URL can have a path, but no query or fragment part.
You also have to specify `auth.callback.relevant_headers` and/or `relevant_cookies`: a list of headers/cookies that your auth logic reads.

On receiving a request that needs authentication, Tobira sends a request to your callback.
That request has no body, but all `relevant_headers` and `relevant_cookies` copied from the incoming request.

> If you include `"cookie"` in the `relevant_headers` field, all cookies are always forwarded (note: this would usually make the caching fairly useless, so you probably want to disable it then).

Reviewer: Maybe link to the caching section here so I don't have to wonder whether I overread something.

banana: foo
apple: bar
cookie: funky-session=abc123;fox=is-the-best
kiwi: baz

{ ... graphql query in body }
```

Then Tobira would send the following request to your callback:

```
GET /tobiraaaaa
Host: localhost:1234
banana: foo
cookie: fox=is-the-best
kiwi: baz
```

</details>

Your callback is expected to return UTF-8 encoded JSON.
Said JSON always has to have a top-level `"outcome"` field, plus additional fields depending on the `outcome`.

- `{ "outcome": "no-user" }`: means that the incoming request is not authenticated.
- `{ "outcome": "user", ... }`: means that the incoming request is authenticated.
  User data is specified in these additional fields (with the same semantic as described in ["User information Tobira needs"](./#user-information-tobira-needs)):
  - `username`
  - `displayName`
  - `userRole`
  - `roles`
  - `email` (optional)

So an example `"outcome": "user"` response might look like this:

```json
{
  "outcome": "user",
  "username": "peter",
  "displayName": "Peter Lustig",
  "email": "peter@lustig.de",
  "userRole": "ROLE_USER_PETER",
  "roles": [
    "ROLE_ANONYMOUS",
    "ROLE_USER",
    "ROLE_COURSE_123",
    "ROLE_COURSE_125"
  ]
}
```

## Caching

> By default, Tobira caches responses from the auth callback in-memory, to speed up successive requests from the same user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Tobira caches responses from the auth callback in memory, to speed up successive requests from the same user.
```

relevant_cookies = ["mySession"]
```

Here is an example for the callback daemon.

```ts
import { getCookies } from "https://deno.land/std@0.213.0/http/cookie.ts";

type User = {
  username: string;
  displayName: string;
  email: string;
  userRole: string;
  roles: string[];
}

const lookupSession = (id: string): User | null {
  /* the interesting logic is here... */
};

Deno.serve({ port: 9090 }, request => {
  const sessionID = getCookies(request.headers)["mySession"];
  const user = lookupSession(sessionID);

  return Response.json(
    user
      ? { outcome: "user", ...user }
      : { outcome: "no-user" }
  );
});
```

### Shibboleth

The following is a very rough outline how one could setup authentication via Shibboleth.
It is assumed that Shibboleth's FastCGI apps are installed and [this nginx Shibboleth module](https://github.com/nginx-shib/nginx-http-shibboleth) is loaded.

The basic idea then is to run the "shibauthorizer" for every route (that requires it, see below).
That adds a bunch of headers containing information about the user, e.g. `Variable-givenName`.
Those are included in the request sent to Tobira, which Tobira then forwards to your callback.

> The callback can read those headers, and building the user information Tobira expects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The callback can read those headers, and build the user information Tobira expects.
```

> Your callback can of course also request additional information from external services, e.g. a list of courses the user is signed up for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It can of course also request additional information from external services, e.g. a list of courses the user is signed up for.
```

```toml
[auth]
source = "callback:http://localhost:9090/"

[auth.callback]
relevant_headers = [
    "Variable-uniqueID",
    "Variable-fullName",
    "Variable-mail",
    "Variable-affiliation",
]
```

Here is an example for the callback daemon.

```ts
Deno.serve({ port: 9090 }, request => {
  const uniqueID = request.header.get("Variable-uniqueID");
  const fullName = request.header.get("Variable-fullName");
  const email = request.header.get("Variable-mail");
  const affiliation = request.header.get("Variable-affiliation");

  // If the headers are not set, the request is not authenticated

>   if (!uniqueID || !surname || !givenName || !email) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  if (!uniqueID || !fullName || !email) {
```

    return Response.json({ outcome: "no-user" });
  }

  const roles = ["ROLE_ANONYMOUS", "ROLE_USER"];
  if (affiliation == "staff") {
    roles.push("ROLE_STAFF");
  }
  for (const courseID of getCoursesOfUser(uniqueID)) {
    roles.push(`ROLE_COURSE_${courseID}`);
  }

  return Response.json({
    outcome: "user",
    username: uniqueID,
    displayName: fullName,
    email,
    userRole: `ROLE_USER_${uniqueID}`,
    roles,
  });
});
```

You might be asking: if the shibauthorizer already has the user data in nginx, i.e. before the request reaches Tobira, why do we pass it through Tobira to the callback?
Good question, and you can actually move your auth logic into the reverse proxy by using `auth.source = "trust-auth-header"`.
However, that has a few disadvantages:
for one, most web servers limit the size of HTTP headers fairly agressively, which leads to problems when your user has lots of roles.
Further, putting that logic into a web server config is quite the adventure.

> Finally, you should configure your nginx in a way that "shibauthorizer" is not ran for routes that don't need authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, you should configure your nginx in a way that "shibauthorizer" is not run for routes that don't need authentication.
```
